What Is a Code Editor and IDE?
You might think these are the same thing, but not quite. A code editor is any application that allows you to edit code files. An IDE, or Integrated Development Environment, is a full application that allows you to compile, run, and debug your code while you edit it.

Perhaps some examples might be helpful.

First, let's consider a few popular IDEs. Visual Studio is an integrated development environment by Microsoft that provides a comprehensive suite of tools for building, debugging, and deploying applications across various platforms.

Another IDE is XCode. Xcode is an integrated development environment by Apple designed for creating, coding, and debugging applications for macOS, iOS, watchOS, and tvOS.

And another IDE would be Android Studio. Android Studio is an integrated development environment by Google specifically designed for building, debugging, and testing Android applications.

Those are just a few examples of IDEs. Now, let's take a look at a few popular code editors.

Visual Studio Code is a lightweight, open-source code editor by Microsoft that supports a wide range of programming languages and provides features like debugging, syntax highlighting, and version control through extensions.

Another popular editor would be Sublime Text. Sublime Text is a fast, versatile text editor known for its sleek interface, powerful features, and support for a wide range of programming languages through customizable syntax highlighting and plugins.

And another one is Notepad++. This is a free, open-source, text and source code editor for Windows that offers syntax highlighting, code folding, and a range of plugins to enhance productivity and customization.

You may have noticed how the code editors focus primarily on the text contents of the file, where the IDEs expose various tools to manage your code.

These examples are all local programs you can run on your computer, but there are also cloud-based editors that you can use.

A cloud-based editor is an online tool that allows users to write, edit, and manage code or text directly through a web browser without needing to install software locally.

Let's take a look at a few cloud-based editors.

Replit is an online platform that provides a collaborative environment for coding, allowing users to write, run, and share code in various programming languages directly from a web browser.

Another popular cloud-based editor is GitHub Codespaces. This is a cloud-based development environment that provides instant access to a fully-configured code editor and development tools directly from GitHub, enabling seamless coding and collaboration.

And another one is Ona. Ona is a cloud-based development environment that integrates with GitHub and GitLab, offering instant, customizable workspaces for coding, building, and debugging directly from your browser.

And there are many more options. Some options, such as Visual Studio Code, are highly extensible and can work with multiple different project types and languages. Other options might be specifically tailored to a small subset of languages or project types.

The application you use might be different for specific projects. You should explore the options to see what will work best for your needs.

Questions

What is the main difference between a code editor and an IDE?


Code editors are free, while IDEs are paid applications.

IDEs allow compilation, running, and debugging of code in addition to editing.(Correct)

Code editors can only be used for web development.

IDEs are cloud-based, while code editors are local applications.

Which of the following is NOT mentioned as an example of a cloud-based code editor?


Replit

GitHub Codespaces

Ona

Visual Studio Code(Correct)

According to the lesson, why might someone choose different coding applications for different projects?


Because some applications are more expensive than others.

Because certain options might be tailored to specific languages or project types.(Correct)

Because cloud-based options are always better than local applications.

Because IDEs are always preferable to code editors.



















How to Install Visual Studio Code onto Your Computer
To install VS Code, you'll want to visit their website to get the appropriate installer for your operating system. Make sure you visit the VS Code website, and not the Visual Studio website.

For Windows, you can download an EXE installer. Once you've downloaded it, run the file and the setup wizard will take you through the installation process.

For Mac, you can download a zip archive which contains a .app that you can run. You can also install VS Code via homebrew.

Open up the Terminal app on your Mac and run the following command:

brew install --cask visual-studio-code
On Linux, you can download a .deb or .rpm file directly. Once you have it installed, you can use the appropriate executable, or CLI command (typically code), to launch the application. And now you're ready to code.

Questions

What's an important distinction to make when downloading Visual Studio Code?


Ensure you're downloading from the official Microsoft website.

Make sure you're on the VS Code website, not the Visual Studio website.(Correct)

Verify that you're downloading the latest version.

Check that your operating system is compatible.

Which of the following is NOT mentioned as a method to install VS Code on macOS?


Downloading a .zip archive.

Using the Mac App Store.(Correct)

Using Homebrew.

Running a .app file.

What command would you use to install VS Code using Homebrew?


sudo brew -i code

sudo yum install code

brew install --cask visual-studio-code(Correct)

homebrew install vscode



















How to Create a Project and Run Your Code Locally in VS Code
To get started, you should know that VS Code considers projects to be "workspaces". The workspace is whichever directory you opened in VS Code.

To begin, you will need to use a command line interface to create a new directory for your new project. A directory is another name for the folder.

Command-line interfaces, or CLI for short, allow you to interact with your operating system through text-based commands. You will learn more about these tools in future lessons.

If you are on Windows, you can use the Command Prompt or PowerShell. If you are on a Mac, you can open up your Terminal app.

Once the command line is open, navigate to the home directory by typing in the cd ~ command and hitting enter on your keyboard. Then type in the mkdir my-project command and hit enter. mkdir, or "make directory" is the command used to create a new directory. You should then open your new directory with VS Code.

There are also some other graphical ways to create a new directory.

Depending on your operating system, you might have a context menu (or right-click option) to open VS Code directly from your file explorer. You could also choose to double-click on the VS Code application. If you feel comfortable with the command line you can run the command code /path/to/folder.

Once it's open, you should see a new blank workspace.

To create a new file, click on the File menu at the top-left corner and select New File.... Then name your file index.html and click on Save.

Now you should see your new file in the explorer tab. Try adding some HTML to your index.html file.

Now you might be tempted to open the HTML file in your browser directly. While that can work, it can also lead to all sorts of unexpected bugs, such as CSS not loading properly.

Instead, you should put your HTML file behind a proper web server. That can sound like an intimidating task if you are new to coding, but there's actually a way to do this right from VS Code.

You'll need to grab the Live Server extension first, which is available for free in the marketplace.

Click on the extensions tab in the left hand corner and type in Live Server in the search bar.

Once you have this installed, you should see a Go live button in your status bar. Make sure you have your HTML file open, and then click it.

Your new page should open automatically in a new tab in the browser. If it doesn't then you can go directly to http://localhost:5500/

Congratulations! You've now set up your very own project in VS Code, and can view your changes with live server.

Questions

What does Visual Studio Code consider to be a "workspace"?


The entire hard drive.

The directory you opened VS Code from.(Correct)

All open files in VS Code.

The VS Code application folder.

Why does the lesson recommend using a web server instead of opening an HTML file directly in a browser?


It's faster to load and makes it easier to spot issues in your codebase.

It provides better security for large software applications.

It avoids unexpected bugs, such as CSS not loading properly.(Correct)

It allows for real-time collaboration with other developers on a team.

What VS Code extension is recommended for easily setting up a local web server?


Web Server.

Live Server.(Correct)

Local Host.

HTML Preview.



















What Are Several Useful Keyboard Shortcuts for Maximizing Productivity in VS Code?
You're likely already familiar with some of the basic shortcuts, which are inherited from your operating system. Shortcuts like Ctrl + S to save, Ctrl + C to copy, and Ctrl + V to paste all work in VS Code.

But there's a few that are application specific and can still level up your productivity. It's worth noting that some of these shortcuts may differ by operating system.

For example, Shift + Alt + F will run your configured formatter (such as prettier, for a JavaScript project) on the currently opened file.

Or Ctrl + Shift + F (Windows), or Cmd + Shift + F (Mac), to search the text contents of all the files in your workspace. Then Ctrl + Shift + H (Windows), or Cmd + Shift + H (Mac), if you want to run a find-and-replace.

If you need to remove a line, Ctrl + Shift + K (Windows), or Cmd + Shift + K (Mac), will delete it.

Need some extra room for all your code? Ctrl + B (Windows), or Cmd + B (Mac), will hide the sidebar - which has the file list and extensions menu.

Or maybe you just can't see your code? Ctrl + plus (Windows), or Cmd + plus (Mac), will increase the scaling of the editor, and Ctrl + minus (Windows), or Cmd + minus (Mac), will decrease it.

Another helpful feature in VS Code is multi-line editing, which allows you to make changes across several lines at once. For example, you can place multiple cursors by using Ctrl + Alt + down and Ctrl + Alt + up (Windows/Linux), or Option + Command + down and Option + Command + up (Mac), to extend the cursor to consecutive lines. You can also press and hold Alt (Windows/Linux) or Option (Mac) and click to add cursors on separate lines wherever you need them. Once the cursors are placed, anything you type or delete will apply to all those locations simultaneously — which can save a lot of time when working with repetitive code.

Finally, if you forget any of these shortcuts, you always have Ctrl + Shift + P (Windows), or Cmd + Shift + P (Mac), which opens the command palette for you to select whatever you may need.

With this knowledge, and maybe a little practice, you are well on your way to becoming a VS Code power user.

Questions

Which Windows keyboard shortcut is used to run the configured formatter on the currently opened file in VS Code?


Ctrl + F

Shift + Alt + F(Correct)

Ctrl + Shift + F

Alt + F4

What function does the keyboard shortcut Ctrl + Shift + K (Windows/Linux) or Cmd + Shift + K (macOS) perform in VS Code?


Opens the command palette.

Increases the editor's text size.

Deletes the current line.(Correct)

Hides the sidebar.

Which Windows keyboard shortcut opens the command palette in VS Code?


Ctrl + P

Ctrl + Shift + P(Correct)

Alt + F4

Ctrl + Space



















What Are Some Good VS Code Extensions You Can Use in Your Editor?
Better Comments is an extension that offers special highlighting for specific code comments. For example, it will call out "TODO" comments, as well as syntax to indicate questions or warnings.

Code Spell Checker offers indication when you have spelled something incorrectly in your code. Because it is designed for code files, it will account for things like camel case.

Error Lens will help you catch any highlighted errors in your code. Rather than having to rely on the underline that VS Code shows by default, this extension highlights the entire line and displays the error message.

Indent Rainbow adds color to your different levels of indentation. In combination with VS Code's native bracket pair colorization, this can dramatically help identify what scope your code is in.

Or maybe you're looking for something a bit more practical? Consider an AI assistant, like GitHub Copilot or Tabnine, to offer you inline suggestions as you are writing your code.

An icon pack, such as VS Code Great Icons, can help make your file tree cleaner and easier to parse at a glance. And an extension like Colorize can help you understand the values in your CSS properties.

You'll also want language-specific extensions for your projects. If you are using JavaScript, you will likely want ESLint and Prettier to lint and format your code. If you are using TypeScript, you might want Pretty Typescript Errors for easier to read messages.

Finally, you can also have a bit of fun with your editor. VS Code Pets offers configurable virtual pets to keep you company while you squash some bugs.

Power Mode will create flashy effects when you achieve a high enough "combo" by writing more code.

Discord Presence will let you show off what you're working on to all of your friends.

And there are so many more extensions out there. Feel free to explore the extension marketplace and see what works best for you.

Questions

What feature does the "Better Comments" extension provide in VS Code?


Automatic spell-checking for comments.

Special highlighting for specific types of code comments.(Correct)

Conversion of comments into documentation.

Removal of unnecessary comments.

Which VS Code extension is described as helping to catch highlighted errors in your code by displaying the error message on the entire line?


Code Spell Checker

Indent Rainbow

Error Lens(Correct)

ESLint

What unique feature does the "VS Code Pets" extension offer?


It helps debug pet-related code.

It provides virtual pets to keep you company while coding.(Correct)

It adds animal-themed icons to your file tree.

It generates code snippets related to pets.