What Is the Terminal, and How Does It Differ from the Command Line?
Let's learn about the terminal, and how it differs from the command line.

The command line is a basic text input interface which allows a user to enter "commands", usually in the form of a series of characters, and submit or execute them, usually by pressing the "Enter" key. You will most-commonly see command line interfaces within a terminal.

A terminal is a special application that offers a command line interface to perform system-level commands beyond the basic read/write operations. You may also hear about "terminal emulators", which are essentially applications that wrap a basic terminal interface to offer additional features or functionality. But for most general purposes, you are probably safe to refer to these as "terminals" as well.

Finally, we will also need to talk about "shells". A shell is the software that wraps the command line and interprets your inputs as commands, returning the output.

But how can you access the terminal on your system?

Well, if you are running a modern version of Windows, you will likely have two different options. Windows offers two distinct shell applications out of the box: Powershell and Command Prompt.

Both of these shells come with their own terminal applications (which share the name of the respective shell), so you can use your application menu to start either a Powershell terminal or a Command Prompt terminal.

Windows also offers a relatively new and modernized terminal emulator aptly named Microsoft Terminal.

You can install this application from the Windows Store, and are then able to launch it just like you would your Powershell or Command Prompt terminals. The advantage of the Microsoft Terminal is that it allows you to access both the Powershell and Command Prompt shells from the same application, as well as your respective Linux shell if you have configured Windows Subsystems for Linux.

MacOS offers a terminal that is aptly named "Terminal". You can access this through your spotlight search, or through your application launcher.

MacOS also offers support for third-party terminal emulators, such as iTerm or Ghostty. You can install these applications from their home pages.

On Linux, the default terminal (and how you launch it) depends highly on the distro and desktop environment you use. There's a lot of support for third-party terminal emulators, too. For example, you could set up kitty in Arch Linux - and you can launch it with an application manager such as wofi.

Linux arguably has the largest variety of terminal applications to choose from. Most of these can be installed through your distro's package manager.

The distinction between "terminal", "shell", and "command line" may seem rather pedantic at times. And for the most part, the terms can generally be used interchangeably. But it is important to know that they have specific meanings, and what each of those meanings are.

Questions

What is a terminal?


A basic text input interface for entering commands.

A special application that offers a command line interface for system-level commands.(Correct)

Software that removes all user inputs in the command line.

The Enter key used to submit commands.

Which of the following best describes a shell?


A hardware component that displays text input.

A special application that allows system-level commands.

Software that wraps the command line and interprets inputs as commands.(Correct)

A third-party terminal emulator.

On Windows, what advantage does Microsoft Terminal offer over traditional options?


It's the only way to access the command line on Windows.

It allows access to both Powershell and Command Prompt shells from the same application.(Correct)

It's the default terminal on all Windows systems.

It replaces the need for a shell entirely.



















What Are Some Shortcuts You Can Use in the Command Line to Speed Up Productivity?
Let's learn about command line shortcuts you can use to speed up productivity.

Terminal and command line shortcuts can help you streamline your workflows and maximize your productivity. For Linux and macOS, which can both trace their roots to Unix, many of these shortcuts will be the same. But for Windows, there will be some differences.

The first shortcut is the up arrow key. Pressing this key will allow you to cycle backwards through your command history, one command at a time. The down arrow key, then, can be used to cycle forwards through your command history. These two keys allow you to quickly cycle through the commands you have previously run to find one you need to run again.

Many shells will also offer an auto-complete feature, proposing commands based on what you have started to type. The tab key can be used to fill in the rest of the suggestion, quickly populating your command line with the full syntax. How these suggestions are generated will vary from shell to shell. For example, in zsh these suggestions are based on your most recent command history. But in PowerShell, they are based on commands, variables, and arguments that are available (with less weight on how recently they were used).

Sometimes a command may result in a lot of output on your terminal. This extra noise can get in the way, or become disruptive to your workflow. In *nix based terminals found on Linux and macOS devices, you can press Control + L to clear the entire screen and start with a fresh clean prompt. In PowerShell, you would need to run the cls command (which you can bind to a key combination like Control + L).

If you need to interrupt a command to stop its execution, you can use Control + C to kill the process. This will terminate the command and create a new prompt, allowing you to continue with whatever else you may need to work on. For PowerShell users, Control + C is also used to copy text - and will only work to terminate a process when the context is not ambiguous (such as when there is no text selected to copy).

The next couple of shortcuts are only available in *nix based terminals, and do not have a PowerShell alternative.

There may be times when you need to multitask, allowing a process or command to run in the background while you work on another. Pressing Control + Z places the current process in a background task and returns you to the command line, where you can continue your work. When you need to shift focus back to the background task, you can use fg to restore it.

And finally, there may be commands you need to run twice in a row. You can press the up arrow key to cycle backwards to the previously run command, but you can also type two exclamation points (!!) into the command line and hit enter - this will automatically run the last executed command.

Many terminals offer even more shortcuts, and I encourage you to read the documentation for your particular setup to find the shortcuts that work best for you. But these basic universal shortcuts should serve as a great starting point for maximizing your productivity and becoming a terminal wizard.

Questions

Which key combination is used to clear the screen in *nix based terminals?


Control + C

Control + L(Correct)

Control + Z

The tab key

What happens when you press Control + Z in a *nix based terminal?


It terminates the current process.

It places the current process in the background.(Correct)

It clears the screen.

It cycles through command history.

Which of the following can be used to quickly run the last executed command in a *nix based terminal?


Control + L

The tab key

!!(Correct)

Control + C



















What Is Bash, and What Are Some Basic Commands?
Let's learn about Bash and some of its basic commands.

Bash stands for Bourne Again SHell, and is arguably the most common shell you will encounter in Unix-like environments. As such, it can be very beneficial to understand how to navigate this shell and use the common commands.

The first command is pwd, which prints the current working directory to the terminal. The "working directory" refers to the directory the terminal is currently pointed at, which is an important thing to know for many of these other commands.

It is entirely possible that your terminal is pointed to the wrong directory. The cd command allows you to change directories. You can specify an absolute path, prefixed with a forward slash (/), a relative path with no prefix, and use the double-dot (..) syntax to move up to the parent directory.

The next command is ls, which lists the contents of your current working directory. This is helpful to see if a file or folder exists in your directory. The ls command also takes flags to show hidden files (the -a flag), file permissions (the -l flag), and other features. You will learn more about command flags in the next lesson. You can also use less or cat to view the contents of a file.

What if the directory does not contain the file or folder you need? There are commands called mkdir and touch that allow you to create them. mkdir creates a new directory, or folder, and touch creates a new file. Both of these commands accept the name of the file or folder you want to create. For example, touch readme.md creates a new Markdown file named readme.md.

Maybe your new file should not have been named readme.md, but it should have been readthis.md. Thankfully, the mv command allows you to move (or rename) a file. It takes the old file name and the new file name.

The rm command allows you to remove (or delete) a file, and with the -r flag will delete a directory. Sometimes a file might be protected, and you'll need to include the -f flag.

The cp command can be used to copy a file or directory to a new location. Unlike the mv command, the cp command does not remove the original file - and in order to copy a directory, you'll need to pass the -r flag.

The echo command can be thought of as the Bash equivalent of a console.log() or print() function. echo takes a string argument, wrapped in quotes, and prints it to the terminal. This might seem silly to run in the terminal, just to get text back in the terminal, but you can actually chain echo to a control symbol. The > symbol allows you to specify a filename to create or overwrite with the new string, like echo "Naomi was here." > readme.md, and the >> symbol will append to the file.

There are many more Bash commands available to you, such as head, tail, chown, and chmod. It would be impossible to cover them all in this lesson. But you can use the man command to see the manual or help page for nearly any command.

You'll likely remember the commands you use most frequently. And for the rest, you can always check the man page.

Questions

What does the pwd command do in Bash?


Changes directories.

Prints the current working directory.(Correct)

Creates a new file.

Lists directory contents.

Which command would you use to create a new file called notes.txt?


mkdir notes.txt

cd notes.txt

touch notes.txt(Correct)

ls notes.txt

If you wanted to rename a file from oldname.txt to newname.txt, which command would you use?


rm oldname.txt newname.txt

mv oldname.txt newname.txt(Correct)

touch newname.txt

cd oldname.txt newname.txt



















What Are Some Command Options and Flags?
Let's learn about command options and flags.

In a previous lesson, you learned about passing arguments to commands such as touch readme.md. Options, or flags, are special arguments you can pass to a command that affect the way it behaves. The two terms are used interchangeably, though "flags" tends to be used more specifically for options that serve as an on/off toggle.

Options are typically prefixed with one or two hyphen (-) symbols, which helps provide a visual distinction between an option and an argument. First, let's look at the two-hyphen, or "long form", syntax.

Many applications, such as ls, accept a --version flag, which prints the current version of the application to the terminal instead of running the application's commands.

Many applications also offer a --help flag, which prints instructions on how to use the application.

The one-hyphen, or "short form", syntax typically uses options that are a single letter. For example, the -a flag with ls lists all files, including hidden files that start with a dot (.), like .env.

The advantage of these short options is that you can chain multiple flags together. Instead of ls --all --human-readable --size you can use the single letters all at once with ls -ahs.

Some options expect a value to be passed to them.

When using long-form options, you typically need to use an equal sign. In this syntax, the value is directly concatenated to the option with the equal (=) symbol. Here is an example of modifying the behavior of ls to either include or exclude colors:

ls --color=never
When using short-form options, you typically separate the value with a space. For example, here are the long and short form options for setting the width of the ls result:

ls -w 50
ls --width=50
Notice how the short form uses -w 50, while the long form uses --width=50. This distinction is important to know, to avoid passing an option value as a positional argument instead.

But if you are ever unsure, remember you can usually use the --help flag to see the expected syntax for options!

Questions

What is the difference between "long form" and "short form" syntax for command options?


Long form uses a single hyphen while short form uses two hyphens.

Long form uses two hyphens while short form uses a single hyphen.(Correct)

Long form is only used for version information.

There is no difference between the two forms.

What is the advantage of using short form options like -ahs?


They require less memory to process.

They are easier to remember.

Multiple options can be chained together.

They always work better than long form options.(Correct)

When using a long-form option that requires a value, what syntax is typically used?


--option value

--option=value(Correct)

-o value

-o=value