
Learn Bash by Building a Boilerplate

The first thing you need to do is start the terminal. Do that by clicking the "hamburger" menu at the top left of the screen, going to the "terminal" section, and clicking "new terminal". Once you open a new one, type echo hello terminal into the terminal and press enter.


What you see in the terminal below is a folder (or directory) on this machine. Type pwd into the terminal and press enter to see the path of the folder. pwd stands for "print working directory".

The output tells you where the folder you are in is located. You are in the project folder, which is in the workspace folder. Type ls into the terminal to see what's in this folder. ls stands for "list".

The output tells you where the folder you are in is located. You are in the project folder, which is in the workspace folder. Type ls into the terminal to see what's in this folder. ls stands for "list".

The output is showing everything in this folder. There's one folder in here. You can use cd <folder_name> to go into a folder. cd stands for "change directory". Change to the freeCodeCamp directory.

You are in the freecodecamp folder now. You may have noticed that the prompt changed to include it. Print the working directory of the freeCodeCamp folder to see the full path of where you are.

You can see the path of the freeCodeCamp folder. It's in the project folder you were just in. List the contents of the freeCodeCamp folder to see what's here.

There's several folders and files here. The folders are blue or green and the files include their extension. Next, change to that test directory.


You can see you are in the test folder now. It shows test in the prompt. Print the full path of this directory. Remember that "folder" and "directory" are the same thing.


That's the path to the test folder, it's in the freeCodeCamp folder. List the contents of this folder.

These are all files. There's no more folders to go into here. You can use cd .. to go back a folder level. The two dots will take you back one level. Go back to the freeCodeCamp folder.

test got removed from the prompt since you left that folder and you're back in the freeCodeCamp folder. List the contents of what's here to remind yourself.

There's the test folder you were just in. You can see what's in a file with more <filename>. Use it to view what's in the package.json file.

It looks like a JSON object. You can empty the terminal with clear. The terminal looks a little cluttered, why don't you clear it.

Now you have a fresh screen 😄 List what's in here again.

You checked out the test folder and the package.json file. What next? Why don't you go into that node_modules directory.

Now the prompt includes node_modules since that's where you are. List what's in the folder.

That's a lot of folders. You can add a flag to a command to use it different ways like this: ls <flag>. List the contents of the node_modules folder in "long list format". Do that by adding the -l flag to the "list" command.

It is showing more details about each item in here and it's a little easier to read. One of the folders is named has, why don't you change into it

You are now in the has folder. List its contents.

There's a few files and folders here. Can you tell the difference? Take a look at more of that README.md file.

Nothing noteworthy in there. You can't see what's in the here anymore, list the contents again.

That one file doesn't appear to have an extension. Strange. Take a look at more of the that "license" file that doesn't show an extension

Pretend you read all that. It looks a little messy in here again so why don't you clear the terminal.


Better. Remind yourself what's in here with the list command.

Go into that src directory to see what you can find in there.

View the full path of this folder.

Getting deeper still. You can see that each new folder has a / in front of it. Take a look at what's in this folder.

Only one file here. Show me what's in it with more.

It's some JavaScript 😄 I think you've fooled around enough. Why don't you navigate out of here. Change back to the has directory.

You're getting pretty good. Change back to the node_modules directory.

You can go back two folders with cd ../.. .Each set of dots represents another folder level. Go back to the project directory from the node_modules directory.

You are back in the project folder where you started. List what's in here again.

That's right. Why don't you get a fresh start by clearing the terminal.

You will be making a website boilerplate. You can make a new folder with mkdir <folder_name>. mkdir stands for "make directory". Make a website directory in this project folder. Remember that "directory" and "folder" mean the same thing.

List what's here to make sure it got created.

It worked. The website files will be in the new directory. Change to the website directory so you can start creating them.

List the contents of the website folder.

It's brand new, there's nothing in it yet. The echo command lets you print anything to the terminal. You used it in the first lesson. Just type what you want to print after it. Use it to print hello website to the terminal.

Websites usually have an index.html file. You can use touch <filename> to create a new file. Create index.html in the website folder.

They usually have a CSS file as well. Create styles.css in the website folder using the same method.

List the contents of the website folder to make sure they got created.

There they are. Next is a JavaScript file. Create index.js in the website folder with the method you have been using.

You might turn this into a git repository. Create .gitignore in the website folder with the same method.

List the contents of the website folder to see your new files.

There's three files, but where's the .gitignore file? I think it's hidden. Most commands have a --help flag to show what the command can do. Display the "help" menu for the ls command. Here's an example: command <flag>

Scroll through the menu to see the flags that go with ls. The flag you are looking for is --all, or -a for short. List all the contents of the website folder using the correct flag.

There's the hidden file. Do you see it? It didn't display before. It also includes . and ... You used cd .. to go back a folder earlier. Change to the . directory.

You didn't go anywhere. The . takes you to the folder you are in, and .. takes you back, or up, a folder. Websites need some images. Create background.jpg in the website folder.

Next, add a header image. Create header.png in the website folder.

Finally, create footer.jpeg in the website folder.

